README.md, before:

# ggCaller_manuscript
Repository of scripts used in [ggCaller](https://github.com/samhorsfield96/ggCaller) manuscript.

## Generating a simulated pangenome

Data is available in ```data/simulation_pangenome```.

### Population Simulation
To generate a simulated population for pangenome analysis, run:

```
python scripts/simulate_full_pangenome.py --gff data/simulated_pangenome/SP_ATCC700669.gff3 --nisolates 100 --n_sim_genes 1000 --pop_size 10e-6 --out sim_pangenome --mutation_rate 1e-14 --gain_rate 1e-12 --loss_rate 1e-12
```

This will generate a list of fasta files in the directory ```sim_pangenome```.

### Adding fragmentation
To fragment assemblies, first copy ```sim_pangenome```. 

```
cp sim_pangenome sim_pangenome_fragmented
```

Then choose a directory ```--ref_dir``` to get empirical read length distributions from (should contain ```.fasta``` files).
Finally, run:

```
python scripts/fragment_fasta.py --ref_dir reference_dir --sample_dir sim_pangenome_fragmented --min_length 10
```

### Adding contaminants
To fragment assemblies, first copy ```sim_pangenome```. 

```
cp sim_pangenome sim_pangenome_contaminated
```

Then choose a infile ```--infile``` to generate fragments from, and --outfile to append to (this is done IN PLACE).
Finally, run:

```
python scripts/insert_random_genome_fragments.py --infile contaminant.fasta --outfile sim_pangenome_fragmented/genome1.fasta --frag_size 10000
```

### Simulating assemblies
Now simulate paired-end reads from your assemblies with [ART](https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/software/biostatistics/art/index.cfm):

```
art_illumina -ss HS25 -sam -i sim_pangenome/genome1.fasta -p -l 150 -f 20 -m 200 -s 10 -o genome1_reads
```

Assemble reads with [SPADES](https://github.com/ablab/spades):

```
spades.py --phred-offset 33 --isolate --threads 1 -1 genome1_reads1.fq -2 genome1_reads2.fq -o genome1_assembly
```

### Gene identification and pangenome analysis
Now run [Prokka](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka) on SPADES assemblies, using the gene annotation from ```simulate_full_pangenome.py```:

```
prokka --cpus 8 --proteins sim_pangenome_prokka_DB.fa --force --outdir prokka_genome1 --notrna --norrna --prefix genome1 genome1_assembly/scaffolds.fasta
```

Run [Panaroo](https://github.com/gtonkinhill/panaroo) on Prokka gene-calls (using moderate clean-mode):

```
panaroo -i prokka_gffs/*.gff -o panaroo_moderate_out --clean-mode moderate -t 8
```

Run [Roary](https://github.com/sanger-pathogens/Roary) on Prokka gene-calls:

```
roary -p 8 -f roary prokka_gffs/*.gff
```

Run [PEPPAN](https://github.com/zheminzhou/PEPPAN) on Prokka gene-calls (use PEPPAN_parser to generate gene presence/absence matrix):

```
PEPPAN -t 8 -p PEPPAN_out prokka_gffs/*.gff
PEPPAN_parser -g PEPPAN_out.PEPPAN.gff -s PEPPAN_out
```

Run ggCaller on all assemblies using the gene annotation from ```simulate_full_pangenome.py```:

```
ggcaller --refs sim_pangenome_list.txt --threads 8 --annotation sensitive --diamonddb sim_pangenome_prokka_DB.fa --out ggCaller_out --clean-mode moderate
```

### Analysing simulated pangenome results

Copy gene presence/absence matrices from respective tools (```gene_presence_absence_roary.csv``` for Roary, Panaroo and ggCaller, ```*.PEPPAN.gene_content.Rtab``` for PEPPAN).
Also copy Prokka gff files for each simulation.

Use ```scripts/compare_simulated_gene_pa.Rmd``` to generate prokka mapping files from gffs, and to compare different pangenome analysis tools. Data is available in ```data/simulated_pangenome```.

This will summary tables detailing false positives, false negatives and correctly-called COGs containing set numbers of errors.

## Comparing real bacterial pangenomes

Gene presence/absence matrices for M. tuberculosis, S. pneumoniae and E. coli used in the ggCaller paper are available in ```data/real_pangenome```

For a chosen dataset, run Prokka, Roary, PEPPAN, Panaroo and ggcaller using the parameters in [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).

Respective gene annotations were provided from:
- [M. tuberculosis](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_000962.3)
- [S. pneumoniae](https://datadryad.org/stash/downloads/file_stream/67467)
- [E. coli](https://microbiology.figshare.com/ndownloader/files/26133194)

## Contig break analysis

Fragment your chosen sequence:

```
python fragment_at_gene.py --CDS data/contig_break/fasta/CDS/CR931662_Streptococcus_pneumoniae_strain_34359_serotype_14_CDS.fa --infile data/contig_break/fasta/CDS/original/CR931662_Streptococcus_pneumoniae_strain_34359_serotype_14.fa
```

Call genes using [GeneMarkS-2](http://exon.gatech.edu/genemark/genemarks2.cgi), or using Prokka. Then use ggCaller or Panaroo as detailed [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).

Analyse gene recall using ```combined_DNA_CDS.fasta``` from Panaroo and ```gene_calls.fasta``` from ggCaller.

To specificy calls from Panaroo, use `--caller pan`, for ggCaller use `--caller ggc`

```
python scripts/gene_recall.py --caller ggc --query data/contig_break/ggc/ggc_group3_fragmented/gene_calls.ffn --seq data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_seqs.fasta --CDS data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_CDS.fasta --exact --outpref output
```

This will print precision and recall statistics to the console, and generate ```len_prop.txt``` which describes the proportions of real genes covered by the respective ORF call.

Additionally, FASTA and summary files will be generated, containing all errors. These will start with you chosen prefix, and end with:
- "FN" for false negatives
- "FP" for false positives
- "DUP" for duplicated calls that align to the same position in the sequence
- "ART" for artificial calls not present in any reference

To compare calls from multiple tools, run the below command. This will identify shared and exclusive errors for each tool.

```
python scripts/gene_recall.py --seq data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_seqs.fasta --CDS data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_CDS.fasta --exact --caller pan --query data/contig_break/prokka/panaroo_group3_fragmented/combined_DNA_CDS.fasta --caller2 ggc --query2 data/contig_break/ggc/ggc_group3_fragmented/gene_calls.ffn --outpref output
```

The output summary files match those from analysing single tool outputs.

All results generated from prediction comparisons used in the manuscript are available in `data/contig_break/results`

## Gene end comparison

Fasta, alignment and summary files from previous analysis are available in ```data/gene_end_comparison```.

For a chosen dataset, run Prokka, Panaroo and ggCaller using the parameters in [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).

For panaroo, generate a prokka mapping file out a given gene whilst in a directory containing all prokka gffs:

```grep "<target>" *.gff > prokkamap.txt ```

Pull out all genes of interest from ggCaller, reference (example [here](https://datadryad.org/stash/downloads/file_stream/67467)) or panaroo output directories:

```
python scripts/parse_genes.py --fastafile ggCaller_out/gene_calls.faa --targets CLS02009,CLS02800,CLS00182 --outpref aggc_pspA
python scripts/parse_genes.py --fastafile reference/proteins.faa --targets CLS02009,CLS02800,CLS00182 --outpref ref_pspA
python scripts/parse_genes.py --prokkamap prokkamap.txt --panaroodata panaroo_out/gene_data.csv --outpref panaroo_pspA
```

Append a reference protein sequence to the start of each file. Run mafft on files to generate MSA for all genes and tools

```
cat pspA.faa ggc_pspA.faa > ggc_pspA_cat.faa
mafft ggc_pspA_cat.faa > GGC_pbp1a.aln
```

Analyse alignments of gene ends. All ```.aln``` and ```.faa```/```.fasta``` files should be in the same directory

```
python scripts/gene_end_comparison.py --indir all_alignments --outpref results
```

This will generate a series of summary graphs describing gene start position comparisons and percent identity based on MSAs.

## PanGenome wide association study (PGWAS)

Generate a presence/absence matrix for each isolate in the study. Examples are available in ```data/PGWAS/tetracycline/tetracycline_resistance.txt```
and ```data/PGWAS/erythromycin/erythromycin_resistance.txt```

For this study, S. pneumoniae gene annotations were supplied from [here](https://datadryad.org/stash/downloads/file_stream/67467).

Generate a ```.nwk``` tree using ggCaller (use strict cut-offs for graph cleaning and tree generation) and root at midpoint.

```
ggcaller --refs genome_list.txt --out pyseer_results --clean-mode strict --ignore-pseduogenes --alignment core --aligner def --annotation sensitive --diamonddb CDS_protein_sequences.dmnd --save --core-threshold 1
python scripts/midpoint_root.py --infile pyseer_results/core_tree.nwk --outfile core_tree_NJ_midpoint.nwk
```

Convert the nwk tree to distance matrix using pyseer

```
python pyseer/phylogeny_distance.py --lmm core_tree_NJ_midpoint.nwk > phylogeny_K.tsv
```

Generate unitigs using unitig-caller

```
unitig-caller --call --refs refs.txt --out PGWAS_unitigs
```

Calculate unitig associations with phenotype and determine adjusted signficance cut-off threshold.

```
pyseer --lmm --phenotypes erythromycin_resistance.txt --kmers PGWAS_unitigs.pyseer.gz --similarity phylogeny_K.tsv --output-patterns unitigs_patterns.txt --cpu 8 > unitigs_hits.txt
python pyseer/count_patterns.py unitigs_patterns.txt
cat <(head -1 tet_unitigs.txt) <(awk '$4<THRESHOLD {print $0}' unitigs_hits.txt) > significant_unitigs.txt
```

Map unitigs to a single reference with phandango and annotate

```
phandango_mapper significant_kmers.txt ref.fa phandango.plot
annotate_hits_pyseer significant_unitigs.txt references.txt annotated_unitigs.txt
```

Generate query in correct format, query singificant hits in ggCaller graph

```
awk -F '\t' 'NR>1 && NF=1' significant_unitigs.txt > significant_unitigs_query.txt
ggcaller --graph genome_list.gfa --colours genome_list.bfg_colors --threads 16 --out pyseer_query --data pyseer_results/ggc_data --query significant_unitigs_query.txt --query-id 1.0
```

Analyse hits. Annotation files should match that used [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5708525/#SD1)

```
python scripts/count_annotations.py --fasta pyseer_query/matched_queries.fasta --outpref annotations --annotations annotations_file.xlsx
```

This will generate a series of graphs describing the gene annotations covered by significant unitigs.

All singificant unitigs and annotated unitigs by pyseer are available in respective folders in `data/PGWAS`

## Computational benchmarking

Data is available in ```data/computational_benchmarking```.

Tools were run as detailed in [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).

Commit message:

Adds real pangenome results and updates simulation pangenome data for ggc v1.3.4

README.md, after:

# ggCaller_manuscript
Repository of scripts used in [ggCaller](https://github.com/samhorsfield96/ggCaller) manuscript.

## Generating a simulated pangenome

Data is available in ```data/simulation_pangenome```.

### Population Simulation
To generate a simulated population for pangenome analysis, run:

```
python scripts/simulate_full_pangenome.py --gff data/simulated_pangenome/SP_ATCC700669.gff3 --nisolates 100 --n_sim_genes 1000 --pop_size 10e-6 --out sim_pangenome --mutation_rate 1e-14 --gain_rate 1e-12 --loss_rate 1e-12
```

This will generate a list of fasta files in the directory ```sim_pangenome```.

### Adding fragmentation
To fragment assemblies, first copy ```sim_pangenome```. 

```
cp sim_pangenome sim_pangenome_fragmented
```

Then choose a directory ```--ref_dir``` to get empirical read length distributions from (should contain ```.fasta``` files).
Finally, run:

```
python scripts/fragment_fasta.py --ref_dir reference_dir --sample_dir sim_pangenome_fragmented --min_length 10
```

### Adding contaminants
To fragment assemblies, first copy ```sim_pangenome```. 

```
cp sim_pangenome sim_pangenome_contaminated
```

Then choose a infile ```--infile``` to generate fragments from, and --outfile to append to (this is done IN PLACE).
Finally, run:

```
python scripts/insert_random_genome_fragments.py --infile contaminant.fasta --outfile sim_pangenome_fragmented/genome1.fasta --frag_size 10000
```

### Simulating assemblies
Now simulate paired-end reads from your assemblies with [ART](https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/software/biostatistics/art/index.cfm):

```
art_illumina -ss HS25 -sam -i sim_pangenome/genome1.fasta -p -l 150 -f 20 -m 200 -s 10 -o genome1_reads
```

Assemble reads with [SPADES](https://github.com/ablab/spades):

```
spades.py --phred-offset 33 --isolate --threads 1 -1 genome1_reads1.fq -2 genome1_reads2.fq -o genome1_assembly
```

### Gene identification and pangenome analysis
Now run [Prokka](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka) on SPADES assemblies, using the gene annotation from ```simulate_full_pangenome.py```:

```
prokka --cpus 8 --proteins sim_pangenome_prokka_DB.fa --force --outdir prokka_genome1 --notrna --norrna --prefix genome1 genome1_assembly/scaffolds.fasta
```

Run [Panaroo](https://github.com/gtonkinhill/panaroo) on Prokka gene-calls (using moderate clean-mode):

```
panaroo -i prokka_gffs/*.gff -o panaroo_moderate_out --clean-mode moderate -t 8
```

Run [Roary](https://github.com/sanger-pathogens/Roary) on Prokka gene-calls:

```
roary -p 8 -f roary prokka_gffs/*.gff
```

Run [PEPPAN](https://github.com/zheminzhou/PEPPAN) on Prokka gene-calls (use PEPPAN_parser to generate gene presence/absence matrix):

```
PEPPAN -t 8 -p PEPPAN_out prokka_gffs/*.gff
PEPPAN_parser -g PEPPAN_out.PEPPAN.gff -s PEPPAN_out
```

Run ggCaller on all assemblies using the gene annotation from ```simulate_full_pangenome.py```:

```
ggcaller --refs sim_pangenome_list.txt --threads 8 --annotation sensitive --diamonddb sim_pangenome_prokka_DB.fa --out ggCaller_out --clean-mode moderate
```

### Analysing simulated pangenome results

Copy gene presence/absence matrices from respective tools (```gene_presence_absence_roary.csv``` for Roary, Panaroo and ggCaller, ```*.PEPPAN.gene_content.Rtab``` for PEPPAN).
Also copy Prokka gff files for each simulation.

Use ```scripts/compare_simulated_gene_pa.Rmd``` to generate prokka mapping files from gffs, and to compare different pangenome analysis tools. Data is available in ```data/simulated_pangenome```.

This will summary tables detailing false positives, false negatives and correctly-called COGs containing set numbers of errors.

## Comparing real bacterial pangenomes

Gene presence/absence matrices for M. tuberculosis, S. pneumoniae and E. coli used in the ggCaller paper are available in ```data/real_pangenome```

For a chosen dataset, run Prokka, Roary, PEPPAN, Panaroo and ggcaller using the parameters in [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).

Respective gene annotations were provided from:
- [M. tuberculosis](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_000962.3)
- [S. pneumoniae](https://datadryad.org/stash/downloads/file_stream/67467)
- [E. coli](https://microbiology.figshare.com/ndownloader/files/26133194)

Gene presence/absence matrices for all tools are available in `data/real_pangenome/gene_pa`

For analysing COG consistency to determine COG size and coefficient of variation (CV), two scripts are required. 

When analysing ggCaller or Panaroo, run the command below with the respective .gml file. Analysis in the manuscript ignored refound/pseudogenes.

```
python parse_gml.py --infile data/COG_consistency/Spneumoniae_panaroo_str.gml --ignore_refound --outpref output
```

PEPPAN and Roary must be analysed together, as Roary does not provide gene lengths in output files. Run:

```
python parse_gff.py --peppan data/COG_consistency/Pneumo.PEPPAN.gff --roary data/COG_consistency/Spneumoniae_roary.txt --outpref output --ignore_pseudogenes
```

These commands output a number of statistics:
- "IQR" interquartile range of genes lengths within COGs
- "MAD" median average deviation of genes lengths within COGs
- "STDDEV" standard deviation and coefficient of variation (CV) of genes lengths within COGs
- "sizes" number of genes in each COG

Results used in the manuscript are available in `data/real_pangenome/COG_consistency/results`

## Contig break analysis

Fragment your chosen sequence:

```
python fragment_at_gene.py --CDS data/contig_break/fasta/CDS/CR931662_Streptococcus_pneumoniae_strain_34359_serotype_14_CDS.fa --infile data/contig_break/fasta/CDS/original/CR931662_Streptococcus_pneumoniae_strain_34359_serotype_14.fa
```

Call genes using [GeneMarkS-2](http://exon.gatech.edu/genemark/genemarks2.cgi), or using Prokka. Then use ggCaller or Panaroo as detailed [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).

Analyse gene recall using ```combined_DNA_CDS.fasta``` from Panaroo and ```gene_calls.fasta``` from ggCaller.

To specificy calls from Panaroo, use `--caller pan`, for ggCaller use `--caller ggc`

```
python scripts/gene_recall.py --caller ggc --query data/contig_break/ggc/ggc_group3_fragmented/gene_calls.ffn --seq data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_seqs.fasta --CDS data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_CDS.fasta --exact --outpref output
```

This will print precision and recall statistics to the console, and generate ```len_prop.txt``` which describes the proportions of real genes covered by the respective ORF call.

Additionally, FASTA and summary files will be generated, containing all errors. These will start with you chosen prefix, and end with:
- "FN" for false negatives
- "FP" for false positives
- "DUP" for duplicated calls that align to the same position in the sequence
- "ART" for artificial calls not present in any reference

To compare calls from multiple tools, run the below command. This will identify shared and exclusive errors for each tool.

```
python scripts/gene_recall.py --seq data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_seqs.fasta --CDS data/contig_break/ggc/fasta/all_CDS.fasta --exact --caller pan --query data/contig_break/prokka/panaroo_group3_fragmented/combined_DNA_CDS.fasta --caller2 ggc --query2 data/contig_break/ggc/ggc_group3_fragmented/gene_calls.ffn --outpref output
```

The output summary files match those from analysing single tool outputs.

All results generated from prediction comparisons used in the manuscript are available in `data/contig_break/results`

## Gene end comparison

Fasta, alignment and summary files from previous analysis are available in ```data/gene_end_comparison```.

For a chosen dataset, run Prokka, Panaroo and ggCaller using the parameters in [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).

For panaroo, generate a prokka mapping file out a given gene whilst in a directory containing all prokka gffs:

```grep "<target>" *.gff > prokkamap.txt ```

Pull out all genes of interest from ggCaller, reference (example [here](https://datadryad.org/stash/downloads/file_stream/67467)) or panaroo output directories:

```
python scripts/parse_genes.py --fastafile ggCaller_out/gene_calls.faa --targets CLS02009,CLS02800,CLS00182 --outpref aggc_pspA
python scripts/parse_genes.py --fastafile reference/proteins.faa --targets CLS02009,CLS02800,CLS00182 --outpref ref_pspA
python scripts/parse_genes.py --prokkamap prokkamap.txt --panaroodata panaroo_out/gene_data.csv --outpref panaroo_pspA
```

Append a reference protein sequence to the start of each file. Run mafft on files to generate MSA for all genes and tools

```
cat pspA.faa ggc_pspA.faa > ggc_pspA_cat.faa
mafft ggc_pspA_cat.faa > GGC_pbp1a.aln
```

Analyse alignments of gene ends. All ```.aln``` and ```.faa```/```.fasta``` files should be in the same directory

```
python scripts/gene_end_comparison.py --indir all_alignments --outpref results
```

This will generate a series of summary graphs describing gene start position comparisons and percent identity based on MSAs.

## PanGenome wide association study (PGWAS)

Generate a presence/absence matrix for each isolate in the study. Examples are available in ```data/PGWAS/tetracycline/tetracycline_resistance.txt```
and ```data/PGWAS/erythromycin/erythromycin_resistance.txt```

For this study, S. pneumoniae gene annotations were supplied from [here](https://datadryad.org/stash/downloads/file_stream/67467).

Generate a ```.nwk``` tree using ggCaller (use strict cut-offs for graph cleaning and tree generation) and root at midpoint.

```
ggcaller --refs genome_list.txt --out pyseer_results --clean-mode strict --ignore-pseduogenes --alignment core --aligner def --annotation sensitive --diamonddb CDS_protein_sequences.dmnd --save --core-threshold 1
python scripts/midpoint_root.py --infile pyseer_results/core_tree.nwk --outfile core_tree_NJ_midpoint.nwk
```

Convert the nwk tree to distance matrix using pyseer

```
python pyseer/phylogeny_distance.py --lmm core_tree_NJ_midpoint.nwk > phylogeny_K.tsv
```

Generate unitigs using unitig-caller

```
unitig-caller --call --refs refs.txt --out PGWAS_unitigs
```

Calculate unitig associations with phenotype and determine adjusted signficance cut-off threshold.

```
pyseer --lmm --phenotypes erythromycin_resistance.txt --kmers PGWAS_unitigs.pyseer.gz --similarity phylogeny_K.tsv --output-patterns unitigs_patterns.txt --cpu 8 > unitigs_hits.txt
python pyseer/count_patterns.py unitigs_patterns.txt
cat <(head -1 tet_unitigs.txt) <(awk '$4<THRESHOLD {print $0}' unitigs_hits.txt) > significant_unitigs.txt
```

Map unitigs to a single reference with phandango and annotate

```
phandango_mapper significant_kmers.txt ref.fa phandango.plot
annotate_hits_pyseer significant_unitigs.txt references.txt annotated_unitigs.txt
```

Generate query in correct format, query singificant hits in ggCaller graph

```
awk -F '\t' 'NR>1 && NF=1' significant_unitigs.txt > significant_unitigs_query.txt
ggcaller --graph genome_list.gfa --colours genome_list.bfg_colors --threads 16 --out pyseer_query --data pyseer_results/ggc_data --query significant_unitigs_query.txt --query-id 1.0
```

Analyse hits. Annotation files should match that used [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5708525/#SD1)

```
python scripts/count_annotations.py --fasta pyseer_query/matched_queries.fasta --outpref annotations --annotations annotations_file.xlsx
```

This will generate a series of graphs describing the gene annotations covered by significant unitigs.

All singificant unitigs and annotated unitigs by pyseer are available in respective folders in `data/PGWAS`

## Computational benchmarking

Data is available in ```data/computational_benchmarking```.

Tools were run as detailed in [Gene identification and pangenome analysis](#gene-identification-and-pangenome-analysis).
